+++
title = "Biological Membranes"
slug = "2009-08-01-biological-membranes"
published = 2009-08-01T21:20:00.016000+01:00
author = "Douglas Ashton"
tags = [ "biology", "stat-mech",]
+++
It's been ages since my last post. This is because I've been busy doing
lots of interesting physics, met a bunch of interesting physicists,
maybe I'll write something about it. For now, something I've been
meaning to write about for a while, and for once it's something that's
timely.  
  
The journal [<span style="font-style: italic;">Soft
Matter</span>](http://www.rsc.org/Publishing/Journals/SM/Index.asp) has
an issue out with a membrane biophysics theme. You can [read the
editorial](http://www.rsc.org/delivery/_ArticleLinking/DisplayHTMLArticleforfree.cfm?JournalCode=SM&Year=2009&ManuscriptID=b912987c&Iss=Advance_Article)
for yourself if you have access, otherwise make do with my ropey
understanding of it. Soft Matter is a relatively new journal that I
think is looking really good. Their website needs work but I'll leave
that for my science 2.0 rant which is bubbling up.  
  
So why am I interested in membranes (I'm not working on them, I'm just
interested)? Well once again I'm interested in them as large system of
small parts that make something amazing when they get together - ie
statistical physics. So, here's my compressed guide to membranes: please
remember I'm not a biologist, I'm very new to this, only barely
understand it and I tend to over simplify things.  
  
<span id="more"></span>  
  
<span style="font-weight: bold;">What does the membrane do?</span>  
  
The cell membrane is what keeps the cell plasma and the outside
separated. It has to selectively let in and out things that the cell
needs or wants rid of. It also handles communications, controls
electrical potential and a host of exciting things. It really is quite a
complex beast.  
  
<span style="font-weight: bold;">What's it made from?</span>  
  
Your basic building blocks are the lipids. We're interested in the
amphiphilic ones. They have hydrophilic heads that like water and
hydrophobic tails that don't. See the pretty MS Paint picture below.  
  
[![](/images/thumbnails/2009-08-01-biological-membranes-lipid.png)](/images/2009-08-01-biological-membranes-lipid.png)  
If you put a bunch of them in water then they will self assemble a
number of different ways depending on the conditions. This on its own is
really interesting. They can all go into little balls protecting the
tails from the water ([micelle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Micelle)).
They can also form a bilayer sheet, with all the tails pointing inwards
- this is what cell membranes are made of. Picture below from the
[micelle wikipedia page](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Micelle).  
[![](/images/thumbnails/2009-08-01-biological-membranes-331px-Phospholipids_aqueous_solution_structures.svg.png)](/images/2009-08-01-biological-membranes-331px-Phospholipids_aqueous_solution_structures.svg.png)  
In a real cell it is of course a little more complicated. Membranes are
typically made from two kinds of lipid (phospholipids and sphingolipids,
the difference seems to be tail length) and on the membrane are
scattered proteins that cut through the sheet that perform all manner of
functions. On the outside of the membrane the heads are mostly in a
two-dimensional liquid kind of organisation (more in moment). Inside the
bilayer you get cholesterol floating around and the tails can be ordered
or disordered - again, more on this in a moment.  
  
<span style="font-weight: bold;">Phases</span>  
  
Within a lipid bilayer we can have two phases that will depend on the
temperature. Strictly speaking you have to be careful when you talk
about a phase in a small system, but let's not worry about that for now.
At higher temperatures we have a state where all the lipid tails are
disordered and wiggling around. This is the liquid-disordered phase,
lipids have a very high mobility and wander around the surface. If you
drop the temperature then the tails all go straight and line up. I <span
style="font-style: italic;">think</span> the heads form a crystal
structure on the surface but the biologists are a little unclear on
this. It's possible the heads arrest in a gel state but I'm not sure.
Either way, they stop moving around - this is the solid phase.  
  
[![](/images/thumbnails/2009-08-01-biological-membranes-phases.png)](/images/2009-08-01-biological-membranes-phases.png)Next,
if you add cholesterol, then you can get a third phase. The so-called
liquid-ordered phase. Here our lipids tails straighten up like the solid
but there are lots of cholesterols getting into the gaps between them.
This apparently makes a phase that is ordered yet remains a liquid with
a high surface mobility. So, we have solid (SO), liquid-disordered (LD)
and liquid ordered (LO).  
  
Finally we can have a mixture of species with different melting
temperatures. This is what real cells are meant to be like. I have to
say I find all these phases a little confusing and the terminology a
little ambiguous. Anyway, stick with me, it gets more interesting from
here on.  
  
<span style="font-weight: bold;">Rafts</span>  
  
The reason I've been going on about phases is because it seems to be
important for the function of the cell. It is thought that on real cell
membranes there exist "rafts", small domains of liquid-ordered lipids
that perform important functions such as ["signaling, recruitment of
specific proteins and
endocytosis"](http://www.rsc.org/Publishing/Journals/SM/article.asp?doi=b901866b).
I don't even know what endocytosis is, which is why we'll now leave
cells for something a bit simpler.  
  
<span style="font-weight: bold;">GUVs</span>  
  
In order to separate what's going on it's possible to grow simplified
membranes by using giant unilamellar vesicles (GUVs). Essentially you
can make a large sphere with mixtures of lipids and cholesterol but
without the proteins and other stuff that's on a real cell. And you can
make them seemingly arbitrarily large.  
  
It turns out that with the two species of lipid and the cholesterol you
can get very complicated phase behaviour. Depending on the conditions
you can get SO-LD coexistence, SO-LO and the most interesting, LO-LD
coexistence. As someone that deals with phase coexistence on a daily
basis this is very exciting. I really don't want to get into the details
so I'll just show some cool pictures from [this
paper](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2005.06.010) by the Keller
group. If my readership ever reaches double figures I might need to
think about asking for permission for these things...  
  
[![](/images/thumbnails/2009-08-01-biological-membranes-guvphase.png)](/images/2009-08-01-biological-membranes-guvphase.png)  
  
Here we have LO-LD coexistence with small domains of LO. You can even
get [critical
points](/2009/05/critical-point.html)!  
  
[![](/images/thumbnails/2009-08-01-biological-membranes-guvcritical.png)](/images/2009-08-01-biological-membranes-guvcritical.png)  
  
There's lots of things I still want to understand. I don't even really
know what the interactions are that are driving these phase transitions.
There are lots of factors including curvature, surface tensions and all
sorts that I haven't thought much about yet. I think this is a really
interesting area that any statistical physicist can't fail to be excited
by. It's encouraging to see some people who appear to be able to link
two such different subjects working on it.  
  
Here are links to the main papers I've been learning from.  
[Veatch and Keller](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2005.06.010),
great paper on the GUVs.  
[Bagatolli and
Kumar](http://www.rsc.org/publishing/journals/SM/article.asp?doi=b901866b),
very nice review in soft matter.  
[Semrau and
Schmidt](http://www.rsc.org/publishing/journals/SM/article.asp?doi=b901587f),
another good review. Didn't get to the end sadly.  
  
And complete phase diagrams are in another paper by [Veatch and
Keller](http://www.pnas.org/content/104/45/17650.abstract)[](http://www.pnas.org/content/104/45/17650.abstract)
